So when you're building out
your data science team,
one of the key roles that you'll be hiring
for, no surprise, is a data scientist.
So this lecture is a little bit about
what to look for in a data scientist.
So what does a data scientist do?
As it's typically defined, a data
scientist runs experiments, pulls and
cleans data, analyzes it and
then communicates the results to people.
So they have to have a set of skills
that allow them to perform all of
these activities.
And so we're going to talk a little
bit about all of the different
specific skills that a data
scientist might need in
order to be able to achieve this minimum
set of tasks that they will have.
Now this is one definition of
a data scientist, obviously
they're other definitions of data
science that are going around right now.
And depending on your definition of
data science, you might have to like,
move the qualifications just a little
bit in one direction or another.
It also depends a little bit how
mature your organization is.
If you're hiring dedicated
data scientists,
this is likely something
like their job description.
If you're at a very early stage, and
you're hiring your first data science
team members, they might have to be
a little bit more of a jack of all trades.
They might need to be able to do
a little bit more data engineering,
as well as data science.
So I'm talking here about a sort of
a mature organization that is hiring data
scientists.
So, then I'm going to talk a little
about what skills they need.
So they need to be able to do statistics.
So, often they'll have learned
that either in classes, so
that they will have a qualification in
statistics, whether it's a degree or
they've taken a large number of classes,
or they've taken some online classes.
They probably need to know something
about prediction and machine learning.
So you can often learn that from
either statistics classes or
from computer science classes
that focus on machine learning.
Again, you can also learn that online.
Those are two different tasks,
inference and prediction.
And so,
we've learned about that in other classes.
And it's important to know that some
people will be better at one, and
some people will be better at the other.
And it kind of depends on what
your organization is doing.
If they're doing more like,
building out predictive tools,
they might need to be a little
stronger machine learning.
If you're trying to do experiments and
come up with new hypotheses,
they might need to be a little
bit better at inference.
They also need to be able
to do data analysis, and
that means the whole picture,
they need to be able to pull data sets out
of a database, they need to be able to
analyze those data sets, clean them up.
Perform the statistical inference or
prediction that they want to do and
then communicate those results.
So data communication skills involve
both being able to analyze the data,
create nice visualizations,
communicate those visualizations in
the results that people in a way that
both expresses what's going on and
carefully expresses how
uncertain they are.
So when you're making decisions,
you know exactly how strongly the data
are supporting the decision
that you're trying to make.
So those are the main qualifications
that they need to have,
the skills that they need to have.
That being said, data scientists usually
have a few of the following skills.
They usually, they know how to use r or
Python So those are general purpose data
science languages that people
can use to analyze data.
They know how to do some
kind of visualization.
Sometimes interactive visualization
with something like D3.js.
And they might know definitely how
to pull data out of a database.
So, they would have experience
with at least one database, SQL,
MongoDB, something like that.
Where they've actually interacted
with pulling data out of a database.
So the very common backgrounds for
data scientists are that they came from
a statics or biostatistics department,
they learned a lot of applications, so
they've actually worked on
lots of real data sets.
That's not always true in statistics and
biostatistics department, but
it's usually true for applied statistics
and biostatistics departments.
And then they've picked up a little
bit of software engineering
they know a little bit about version
control they know a little bit about
programming in other languages and so
those sorts of things allow them to sort
of interface with the other
people in your company but
they're primarily focused in training and
statistics.
Another very common route to data science
is if you do some kind of quantitative
background say for
example physics or engineering, and
then there's some sort of
data science transition.
So they either take some classes online,
like our data science specialization, or
they take some other data science program.
There are lots of transitioning data
science programs, and then they're sort of
Prepared to do data science, but they have
a quantitative or experimental background.
and then the last category that's very
common among data scientists is that
they'll actually trained
in software engineering.
They're actually a trained
software engineer,
or a working software engineer, and
they just pick up some statistics.
Now, they might pick that up,
again, from classes online,
or they might have taken
some courses in college.
And again, it'll depend the mix of
what your organization is looking for.
Are they looking for a person that's going
to do more infrastructure development
blended with a little bit of statistics?
Then it might be better to go for
somebody with a software engineering
plus statistics background.
If you already have an organization,
you really need to be able to do
experiments and make inferences from them.
Going after with somebody from
a Biostatistics Department, for example,
might be a much stronger place to go and
look for your candidate.
So it depends a little bit on
the needs of your organization.
So one thing to keep in mind is that a key
component of being a good data scientist
is not being intimidated by new
kinds of ideas or software.
On the flip side, that means that in some
cases it's really important that you look
for somebody that has specific
software engineering skills, or
specific programming language and
skills that your organization needs.
But you'll often miss out on really
strong candidates by doing that.
And so, one really good idea is to
assess in general, are they a go getter?
Are they able to learn new things?
Are they able to do this sort of general
purpose data science tasks that you want?
And then try to figure out if they'd
be able to pick up on the fly,
the languages that you would need them
to use for your particular problem.
So the key here is, focus on the problem
not on the software programming languages
when you're looking for data scientists,
cuz you'll tend to miss a huge sloth of
people, particularly right
now in the transition.
And while people are sort of the field
of data science is relatively new and
there's not a standardized curriculum for
training data scientists across
all these different disciplines.
So what are the key characteristics
of data scientists that you might
be looking for?
One is, that they're willing
to find answers on their own.
So, often a data scientist has to
come up with their own data sets,
they have to be able to pull data sets
from the organizations, they have to be
able to collaborate with people to figure
out what the right problem to solve is.
And so they need to be able to
chase that down on their own.
You can't always be holding their hand.
So what can you do?
You can go look for evidence of this,
whether that's through leadership that
they've taken on at their
previous organizations.
Whether it's through open source software,
or whether it's through blogging, or
something else where they communicate
that they've gone out and
they've actually been willing to
go get the answers on their own.
They need to unintimidated by new data.
A question that often gets asked, a very
smart question to ask when interviewing
a data scientist, is to throw out a kind
of data that they've never seen before,
whether it's from your organization or
even data that you might have just
imagined from a different organization,
and see how they react to it.
If they react in a way that's positive,
they have ideas,
they think about ways to try to
tackle that problem, that's great.
If they're intimidated by that data type
and they're just trying to force it back
into the box of the data they know,
that might be very challenging as your
organization changes and
the data science changes for them.
And then, it's important that they're
willing to say, I don't know.
This is often hard to get out
of a person in an interview, but
it's important to know that, if they
don't know the answer to a question,
maybe you asked them a question about
your organization that's very specific
That they wouldn't know the answer to.
You need to see if they're
comfortable saying, I don't know,
because often data come to no conclusion.
It's very common for
you to do an experiment and
the conclusion is, we don't know very
much more than we knew before we started.
It's frustrating, and it's one of
the hard parts about data science.
But is important to know that people will,
when faced with that,
are comfortable saying "I don't know," so
that you know that they'll be
communicating the truth to you.
Finally, I guess the way I put it, but
it's put differently by different people,
is that they're friendly but relentless.
In the sense that data science requires
a lot of dedication to getting all
the details right, to making sure
that you interact with people in
a way that moves things forward,
even when they're sort of faced with.
Not necessarily the most
friendly response in return.
And so they need to be very friendly,
they need to have people skills,
those soft skills that come with being a
data scientist are incredibly critical in
a data science team where they're
gonna be working with other people,
they'll be your point of
contact with external units.
And so, it's actually a kind of a grossly
under valued skill in data scientist.
I would say that typically,
people over-value the technical component.
Like do they know programming language X?
And de-value, can they have a conversation
with me that doesn't get testy if I'm
questioning some of their
deep-held beliefs about data?
And so, that's an important component is
making sure that they'll fit in well with
your organization